All that the unsuspecting Bilbo saw that morning was
an old man with a staff. He had a tall pointed blue hat, a
long grey cloak, a silver scarf over which his long white
beard hung down below his waist, and immense black
boots.
“Good Morning!” said Bilbo, and he meant it. The sun
was shining, and the grass was very green. But Gandalf
looked at him from under long bushy eyebrows that stuck
out further than the brim of his shady hat.
“What do you mean?” he said. “Do you wish me a
good morning, or mean that it is a good morning whether
I want it or not; or that you feel good this morning; or that
it is a morning to be good on?”
“All of them at once,” said Bilbo. “And a very fine
morning for a pipe of tobacco out of doors, into the
bargain. If you have a pipe about you, sit down and have
a fill of mine! There’s no hurry, we have all the day
before us!” Then Bilbo sat down on a seat by his door,
crossed his legs, and blew out a beautiful grey ring of
smoke that sailed up into the air without breaking and
floated away over The Hill.
“Very pretty!” said Gandalf. “But I have no time to
blow smoke-rings this morning. I am looking for
someone to share in an adventure that I am arranging, and
it’s very difficult to find anyone.”
“I should think so—in these parts! We are plain quiet
folk and have no use for adventures. Nasty disturbing
uncomfortable things! Make you late for dinner! I can’t
think what anybody sees in them,” said our Mr. Baggins,
and stuck one thumb behind his braces, and blew out
another even bigger smokering. Then he took out his
morning letters, and began to read, pretending to take no
more notice of the old man. He had decided that he was
not quite his sort, and wanted him to go away. But the old
man did not move. He stood leaning on his stick and
gazing at the hobbit without saying anything, till Bilbo
got quite uncomfortable and even a little cross.
“Good morning!” he said at last. “We don’t want any
adventures here, thank you! You might try over The Hill
or across The Water.” By this he meant that the
conversation was at an end.
“What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!”
said Gandalf. “Now you mean that you want to get rid of
me, and that it won’t be good till I move off.”
“Not at all, not at all, my dear sir! Let me see, I don’t
think I know your name?”
“Yes, yes, my dear sir—and I do know your name, Mr.
Bilbo Baggins. And you do know my name, though you
don’t remember that I belong to it. I am Gandalf, and
Gandalf means me! To think that I should have lived to
be good-morninged by Belladonna Took’s son, as if I was
selling buttons at the door!”
“Gandalf, Gandalf! Good gracious me! Not the
wandering wizard that gave Old Took a pair of magic
diamond studs that fastened themselves and never came
undone till ordered? Not the fellow who used to tell such
wonderful tales at parties, about dragons and goblins and
giants and the rescue of princesses and the unexpected
luck of widows’ sons? Not the man that used to make
such particularly excellent fireworks! I remember those!
Old Took used to have them on Midsummer’s Eve.
Splendid! They used to go up like great lilies and
snapdragons and laburnums of fire and hang in the
twilight all evening!” You will notice already that Mr.
Baggins was not quite so prosy as he liked to believe, also
that he was very fond of flowers. “Dear me!” he went on.
“Not the Gandalf who was responsible for so many quiet
lads and lasses going off into the Blue for mad
adventures? Anything from climbing trees to visiting
elves—or sailing in ships, sailing to other shores! Bless
me, life used to be quite inter—I mean, you used to upset
things badly in these parts once upon a time. I beg your
pardon, but I had no idea you were still in business.”
“Where else should I be?” said the wizard. “All the
same I am pleased to find you remember something about
me. You seem to remember my fireworks kindly, at any
rate, and that is not without hope. Indeed for your old
grandfather Took’s sake, and for the sake of poor
Belladonna, I will give you what you asked for.”
“I beg your pardon, I haven’t asked for anything!”
“Yes, you have! Twice now. My pardon. I give it you.
In fact I will go so far as to send you on this adventure.
Very amusing for me, very good for you—and profitable
too, very likely, if you ever get over it.”
“Sorry! I don’t want any adventures, thank you. Not
today. Good morning! But please come to tea—any time
you like! Why not tomorrow? Come tomorrow! Good
bye!” With that the hobbit turned and scuttled inside his
round green door, and shut it as quickly as he dared, not
to seem rude. Wizards after all are wizards.
“What on earth did I ask him to tea for!” he said to
himself, as he went to the pantry. He had only just had
breakfast, but he thought a cake or two and a drink of
something would do him good after his fright.